Once more to daily toil, once more to wear
The livery of shame, once more to search
With miserable task this savage shore!
O thou, who mountest so triumphantly
In yonder Heaven, beginning thy career
Of glory, O thou blessed Sun! thy beams
Fall on me with the same benignant light
Here, at the farthest limits of the world,
And blasted as I am with infamy,
As when in better years poor Elinor
Gazed on thy glad uprise with eye undimm'd
By guilt and sorrow, and the opening morn
Woke her from quiet sleep to days of peace.
In other occupation then I trod
The beach at eve; and then when I beheld
The billows as they roll'd before the storm


Burst on the rock and rage, my timid soul
Shrunk at the perils of the boundless deep,
And heaved a sigh for suffering mariners; . . .
Ah! little thinking I myself was doom'd
To tempt the perils of the boundless deep,
An outcast, unbeloved and unbewail'd.

Still wilt thou haunt me, Memory! still present
The fields of England to my exiled eyes,
The joys which once were mine. Even now I see
The lowly lovely dwelling; even now
Behold the woodbine clasping its white walls,
Where fearlessly the red-breasts chirp'd around
To ask their morning meal: and where at eve
I loved to sit and watch the rook sail by,
And hear his hollow tone, what time he sought
The church-yard elm, that with its ancient boughs
Full-foliaged, half-conceal'd the house of God;
That holy house, where I so oft have heard
My father's voice explain the wonderous works
Of Heaven to sinful man. Ah! little deem'd
His virtuous bosom, that his shameless child
So soon should spurn the lesson, . . sink, the slave
Of Vice and Infamy, . . the hireling prey
Of brutal appetite;—at length worn out
With famine, and the avenging scourge of guilt,
Should share dishonesty,—yet dread to die!

Welcome, ye savage lands, ye barbarous climes,
Where angry England sends her outcast sons,
I hail your joyless shores! My weary bark,
Long tempest-tost on Life's inclement sea,


Here hails her haven; welcomes the drear scene,
The marshy plain, the briar-entangled wood,
And all the perils of a world unknown.
For Elinor has nothing new to fear
From cruel Fortune; all her rankling shafts
Barb'd with disgrace, and venom'd with disease,
Have pierced my bosom, and the dart of death
Has lost its terrors to a wretch like me.

Welcome, ye marshy heaths, ye pathless woods,
Where the rude native rests his wearied frame
Beneath the sheltering shade; where, when the storm
Benumbs his naked limbs, he flies to seek
The dripping shelter. Welcome, ye wild plains
Unbroken by the plough, undelved by hand
Of patient rustic; where for lowing herds,
And for the music of the bleating flocks,
Alone is heard the kangaroo's sad note
Deepening in distance. Welcome, wilderness,
Nature's domain! for here, as yet unknown
The comforts and the crimes of polish'd life,
Nature benignly gives to all enough,
Denies to all a superfluity.
What though the garb of infamy I wear,
Though day by day along the echoing beach
I gather wave-worn shells; yet day by day
I earn in honesty my frugal food,
And lay me down at night to calm repose;
No more condemned, the mercenary tool
Of brutal lust, while heaves the indignant heart
Abhorrent, and self-loathed, to fold my arms


Round the rank felon, and for daily bread
To hug contagion to my poison'd breast!
On these wild shores the saving hand of Grace
Will probe my secret soul, and cleanse its wounds,
And fit the faithful penitent for Heaven.


Time, Noon.
See'st thou not, William, that the scorching sun
By this time half his daily race hath run?
The savage thrusts his light canoe to shore,
And hurries homeward with his fishy store.
Suppose we leave awhile this stubborn soil,
To eat our dinner and to rest from toil.

Agreed. Yon tree, whose purple gum bestows
A ready medicine for the sick man's woes,
Forms with its shadowy boughs a cool retreat
To shield us from the noontide's sultry heat.
Ah, Humphrey! now upon old England's shore
The weary labourer's morning work is o'er.
The woodman there rests from his measured stroke,
Flings down his axe, and sits beneath the oak;
Savour'd with hunger there he eats his food,
There drinks the cooling streamlet of the wood.
To us no cooling streamlet winds its way,
No joys domestic crown for us the day;
The felon's name, the outcast's garb we wear,
Toil all the day, and all the night despair.



Aye, William! labouring up the furrow'd ground,
I used to love the village clock's old sound,
Rejoice to hear my morning toil was done,
And trudge it homeward when the clock went one.
'Twas ere I turn'd a soldier and a sinner!
Pshaw! curse this whining—let us fall to dinner.

I too have loved this hour, nor yet forgot
The household comforts of my little cot;
For at this hour my wife with watchful care
Was wont her humble dainties to prepare;
The keenest sauce by hunger was supplied,
And my poor children prattled at my side.
Methinks I see the old oak table spread,
The clean white trencher and the good brown bread:
The cheese, my daily fare, which Mary made,
For Mary knew full well the housewife's trade;
The jug of cyder,—cyder I could make;—
And then the knives,—I won 'em at the wake.
Another has them now! I toiling here
Look backward like a child, and drop a tear.

I love a dismal story: tell me thine,
Meantime, good Will, I'll listen as I dine;
I too, my friend, can tell a piteous story
When I turn'd hero how I purchased glory.



But, Humphrey, sure thou never canst have known
The comforts of a little home thine own:
A home so snug, so cheerful too, as mine,
'Twas always clean, and we could make it fine.
For there King Charles's Golden Rules were seen,
And there—God bless'em both! the King and Queen.
The pewter plates, our garnish'd chimney's grace,
So bright, that in them you might see your face;
And over all, to frighten thieves, was hung,
Well clean'd, although but seldom used, my gun,
Ah! that damn'd gun! I took it down one morn, . .
A desperate deal of harm they did my corn!
Our testy Squire, too, loved to save the breed,
So covey upon covey ate my seed.
I mark'd the mischievous rogues, and took my aim;
I fired, they fell, and... up the keeper came.
That cursed morning brought on my undoing;
I went to prison, and my farm to ruin.
Poor Mary! for her grave the parish paid,
No tomb-stone tells where her remains are laid!
My children.. my poor boys..

Come! . . grief is dry...
You to your dinner; . . to my story I.
For you, my friend, who happier days have known,
And each calm comfort of a home your own,
This is bad living: I have spent my life
In hardest toil and unavailing strife,


And here, (from forest ambush safe at least,)
To me this scanty pittance seems a feast.
I was a plough-boy once, as free from woes
And blithesome as the lark with whom I rose.
Each evening at return a meal I found;
And though my bed was hard, my sleep was sound.
One Whitsuntide, to go to fair I drest
Like a great bumpkin in my Sunday's best;
A primrose posey in my hat I stuck,
And to the revel went to try my luck.
From show to show, from booth to booth I stray,
See, stare, and wonder all the live-long day.
A sergeant to the fair recruiting came,
Skill'd in man-catching, to beat up for game;
Our booth he enter'd and sat down by me; . .
Methinks even now the very scene I see!
The canvass roof, the hogshead s running store,
The old blind fiddler seated next the door,
The frothy tankard passing to and fro,
And the rude rabble round the puppet-show.
The sergeant eyed me well; the punch-bowl comes,
And as we laugh'd and drank, up struck the drums.
And now he gives a bumper to his wench,
God save the King! and then, God damn the French!
Then tells the story of his last campaign,
How many wounded and how many slain,
Flags flying, cannons roaring, drums a-beating,
The English marching on, the French retreating...
“Push on.. push on, my lads! they fly before ye,
March on to riches, happiness, and glory!”
At first I wonder'd, by degrees grew bolder,
Then cried, “'Tis a fine thing to be a soldier!”


“Aye, Humphrey!” says the sergeant, . . “that's your name?
Tis a fine thing to fight the French for fame!
March to the field, . . knock out a Mounseer's brains,
And pick the scoundrel's pocket for your pains.
Come, Humphrey, come! thou art a lad of spirit;
Rise to a halbert, as I did, . . by merit!
Wouldst thou believe it? even I was once
As thou art now, a plough-boy and a dunce;
But courage raised me to my rank. How now, boy!
Shall Hero Humphrey still be Numps the ploughboy?
A proper-shaped young fellow! tall and straight!
Why, thou wert made for glory! . . five feet eight!
The road to riches is the field of fight! . .
Didst ever see a guinea look so bright?
Why regimentals, Numps, would give thee grace,
A hat and feather would become that face;
The girls would crowd around thee to be kiss'd! . .
Dost love a girl?”—“OddZounds!” I cried, “I'll list!”
So pass'd the night; anon the morning came,
And off I set a volunteer for fame.
“Back shoulders, turn out your toes, hold up your head,
“Stand easy!”.. so I did... till almost dead.
O how I long'd to tend the plough again,
Trudge up the field, and whistle o'er the plain,
When tired and sore, amid the piteous throng,
Hungry, and cold, and wet, I limp'd along,
And growing fainter as I pass'd and colder,
Cursed that ill hour when I became a soldier!


In town I found the hours more gaily pass,
And time fled swiftly with my girl and glass;
The girls were wonderous kind and wonderous fair,
They soon transferr'd me to the Doctor's care;
The Doctor undertook to cure the evil,
And he almost transferr'd me to the Devil.
'Twere tedious to relate the dismal story
Of fighting, fasting, wretchedness, and glory.
At last discharged, to England's shores I came,
Paid for my wounds with want instead of fame;
Found my fair friends, and plunder'd as they bade me;
They kiss'd me, coax'd me, robb'd me, and betray'd me.
Tried and condemn'd His Majesty transports me,
And here in peace, I thank him, he supports me.
So ends my dismal and heroic story,
And Humphrey gets more good from guilt than glory.

Time, Evening.
'Tis a calm pleasant evening, the light fades away,
And the sun going down has done watch for the day.
To my mind we live wonderous well when transported;
It is but to work, and we must be supported.
Fill the cann, Dick! Success here to Botany Bay!

Success if you will, . . but God send me away!

You lubberly landsmen don't know when you're well!
Hadst thou known half the hardships of which I can tell!
The sailor has no place of safety in store;
From the tempest at sea, to the press-gang on shore!
When Roguery rules all the rest of the earth,
God be thank'd, in this corner I've got a good berth.

Talk of hardships! what these are the sailor dont know;
'Tis the soldier, my friend, that's acquainted with woe;


Long journies, short halting, hard work, and small pay,
To be popt at like pigeons for sixpence a day! . .
Thank God I'm safe quarter'd at Botany Bay.

Ah! you know but little: I'll wager a pot
I have suffer'd more evils than fell to your lot.
Come, we'll have it all fairly and properly tried,
Tell story for story, and Dick shall decide.

Done.

Done. 'Tis a wager, and I shall be winner;
Thou wilt go without grog, Sam, to-morrow at dinner.

I was trapp'd by the Sergeant's palavering pretences,
He listed me when I was out of my senses;
So I took leave to-day of all care and all sorrow,
And was drill'd to repentance and reason to-morrow.

I would be a sailor and plough the wide ocean,
But was soon sick and sad with the billows' commotion,
So the boatswain he sent me aloft on the mast,
And cursed me, and bade me cry there, . . and hold fast!

After marching all day, faint and hungry and sore,
I have lain down at night on the swamps of the moor,


Unshelter'd and forced by fatigue to remain,
All chill'd by the wind and benumb'd by the rain.

I have rode out the storm when the billows beat high,
And the red gleaming lightnings flash'd through the dark sky;
When the tempest of night the black sea overcast,
Wet and weary I labour'd, yet sung to the blast.

I have march'd, trumpets sounding, drums beating, flags flying,
Where the music of war drown'd the shrieks of the dying;
When the shots whizz'd around me, all dangers defied;
Push'd on when my comrades fell dead at my side;
Drove the foe from the mouth of the cannon away,
Fought, conquer'd, and bled, all for sixpence a-day.

And I too, friend Samuel, have heard the shots rattle!
But we seamen rejoice in the play of the battle;
Though the chain and the grape-shot roll splintering around,
With the blood of our messmates though slippery the ground,
The fiercer the fight, still the fiercer we grow,
We heed not our loss so we conquer the foe;


And the hard battle won, if the prize be not sunk,
The Captain gets rich, and the Sailors get drunk.

God help the poor soldier when backward he goes,
In disgraceful retreat through a country of foes!
No respite from danger by day or by night,
He is still forced to fly, still o'ertaken to fight;
Every step that he takes he must battle his way,
He must force his hard meal from the peasant away;
No rest, and no hope, from all succour afar, . .
God forgive the poor soldier for going to the war!

But what are these dangers to those I have past,
When the dark billows roar'd to the roar of the blast;
When we work'd at the pumps worn with labour and weak,
And with dread still beheld the increase of the leak?
Sometimes as we rose on the wave could our sight,
From the rocks of the shore catch the light-house's light;
In vain to the beach to assist us they press;
We fire faster and faster our guns of distress;
Still with rage unabating the wind and waves roar; . .
How the giddy wreck reels, as the billows burst o'er!
Leap, leap; for she yawns, for she sinks in the wave!
Call on God to preserve.. for God only can save!

There's an end of all troubles, however, at last!
And when I in the waggon of wounded was cast,


When my wounds with the chilly night-wind smarted sore,
And I thought of the friends I should never see more,
No hand to relieve, scarce a morsel of bread,
Sick at heart I have envied the peace of the dead.
Left to rot in a jail, till by treaty set free,
Old England's white cliffs with what joy did I see!
I had gain'd enough glory, some wounds, but no good,
And was turn'd on the public to shift how I could.
When I think what I've suffer'd, and where I am now,
I curse him who snared me away from the plough.

When I was discharged, I went home to my wife,
There in comfort to spend all the rest of my life.
My wife was industrious, we earn'd what we spent,
And though little we had, were with little content;
And whenever I listen'd and heard the wind roar,
I bless'd God for my little snug cabin on shore.
At midnight they seized me, they dragg'd me away,
They wounded me sore when I would not obey,
And because for my country I'd ventured my life,
I was dragg'd like a thief from my home and my wife.
Then the fair wind of fortune chopt round in my face,
And want at length drove me to guilt and disgrace.
But all's for the best; . . on the world's wide sea cast,
I am haven'd in peace in this corner at last.

Come, Dick! we have done.. and for judgement we call.



And in faith I can give you no judgement at all:
But that as you're now settled, and safe from foul weather,
You drink up your grog, and be merry together.


Time, Night. Scene, The Woods.
Where shall I turn me? whither shall I bend
My weary way? thus worn with toil and faint,
How through the thorny mazes of this wood
Attain my distant dwelling? That deep cry
That echoes through the forest, seems to sound
My parting knell: it is the midnight howl
Of hungry monsters prowling for their prey!
Again! O save me—save me, gracious Heaven!
I am not fit to die!

Thou coward wretch,
Why palpitates thy heart? why shake thy limbs
Beneath their palsied burthen? Is there aught
So lovely in existence? wouldst thou drain
Even to its dregs the bitter draught of life?
Stamp'd with the brand of Vice and Infamy,
Why should the felon Frederic shrink from Death?

Death! Where the magic in that empty name
That chills my inmost heart? Why at the thought
Starts the cold dew of fear on every limb?
There are no terrors to surround the Grave,
When the calm Mind collected in itself
Surveys that narrow house: the ghastly train


That haunt the midnight of delirious Guilt
Then vanish; in that home of endless rest
All sorrows cease! . . Would I might slumber there!

Why then this panting of the fearful heart?
This miser love of life, that dreads to lose
Its cherish'd torment? Shall a man diseased
Yield up his members to the surgeon's knife,
Doubtful of succour, but to rid his frame
Of fleshly anguish; and the coward wretch,
Whose ulcerated soul can know no help,
Shrink from the best Physician's certain aid?
Oh, it were better far to lie me down
Here on this cold damp earth, till some wild beast
Seize on his willing victim.

If to die
Were all, 'twere sweet indeed to rest my head
On the cold clod, and sleep the sleep of Death.
But if the Archangel's trump at the last hour
Startle the ear of Death, and wake the soul
To frenzy? . . Dreams of infancy; fit tales
For garrulous beldames to affrighten babes!
What if I warr'd upon the world? the world
Had wrong'd me first: I had endured the ills
Of hard injustice; all this goodly earth
Was but to me one wide waste wilderness;
I had no share in Nature's patrimony;
Blasted were all my morning hopes of youth,
Dark Disappointment followed on my ways,
Care was my bosom inmate, Penury
Gnaw'd at my heart. Eternal One, thou know'st
How that poor heart, even in the bitter hour


Of lewdest revelry has inly yearn'd
For peace.

My Father! I will call on thee,
Pour to thy mercy-seat my earnest prayer,
And wait thy righteous will, resign'd of soul.
O thought of comfort! how the afflicted heart,
Tired with the tempest of its passions, rests
On you with holy hope! The hollow howl
Of yonder harmless tenant of the woods
Comes with no terror to the sober'd sense.
If I have sinn'd against mankind, on them
Be that past sin; they made me what I was.
In these extremest climes Want can no more
Urge me to deeds of darkness, and at length
Here I may rest. What though my hut be poor—
The rains descend not through its humble roof: . . .
Would I were there again! The night is cold;
And what if in my wanderings I should rouse
The savage from his thicket!

Hark! the gun!
And lo, the fire of safety! I shall reach
My little hut again! again by toil
Force from the stubborn earth my sustenance,
And quick-ear'd guilt will never start alarm'd
Amid the well-earn'd meal. This felon's garb..
Will it not shield me from the winds of Heaven?
And what could purple more? O strengthen me,
Eternal One, in this serener state!
Cleanse thou mine heart, so Penitence and Faith
Shall heal my soul, and my last days be peace.

